# C Fundamentals

Concepts in this chapter:

- Preprocessing directives
- Functions
- Variables
- Statements

## 2.1 Writing a Simple Program

`pun.c` displays a message each time it is run:

```c
#include <stdio.h>  //Includes info about C's standard I/O library

int main(void)  //Contains the program's executable code
{
    printf("To C, or not to C: that is the question.\n");  //Func from the standard I/O library (stdio)
    return 0;   //Returns the value 0 to the OS when it terminates
}
```

### Compiling and Linking

Steps needed to get `pun.c` to run:

- Create a file named `pun.c` containing the program - the `.c` extension is often required by compilers
- Convert the program to a form that the machine can execute, which usually involves three steps:
    1. ***Preprocessing***: obeys commands that begin with `#` which are called ***directives***. The ***preprocessor*** is like an editor, can add to and modify the program
    2. ***Compiling***: translates the modified program into machine instructions called ***object code***
    3. ***Linking***: combines object code from the compiler with any additional code (like library functions) that are used in the program

Usually the preprocessor is integrated with the compiler so no extra work is required to do this.

I will be using the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) like this:

```shell
gcc -Wall -Werror -g -o pun pun.c
```

- `-Wall` enables all warnings about questionable constructions that are easy to avoid
- `-Werror` makes all warnings into errors
- `-g`
    - requests that the compiler and linker generate and retain source-level debugging/symbol info in the executable itself
    - reference for more info on this flag: [https://stackoverflow.com/a/5179230/5906389](https://stackoverflow.com/a/5179230/5906389)
    - reference for what is a core file: [https://stackoverflow.com/a/7326789/5906389](https://stackoverflow.com/a/7326789/5906389)
- `-o` provide option to name the primary output file (executable) something other than `a.out`

### Integrated Development Environments

An IDE provides tools for editing, compiling, linking, executing, and debugging programs.
I'll plan to use Visual Studio Code with the C/C++ plugin which helps with editing and debugging, then rely on gcc for compiling and linking. Executing will probably just be done manually (unless I find a better alternative later).

## 2.2 The General Form of a Simple Program

Simple C programs have the form

```c
//directives
int main(void)
{
    //statements
}
```

A note about formatting - in the book in the block above, `directives` and `statements` are written in italics, and the rest is monospaced. I don't know how to make that look good in markdown so I'll just use comments instead of italics for "text to be supplied by the programmer", at least as long as it makes sense.

C uses `{` and `}` like other languages use `begin` and `end` which illustrates a general point about how C relies on abbreviations and special symbols.

Three key language features:

1. Directives: editing commands that modify the program prior to compilation
2. Functions: named blocks of executable code
3. Statements: commands to perform when the program is run

### Directives

C programs are edited by the preprocessor before compilation; commands for the preprocessor are called directives.

The first line of `pun.c` is:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
```

which states that the info in `<stdio.h>` is to be "included" into the program before compilation. The `.h` denotes it is a ***header***; each contains info about some part of the standard library. C has no built-in read or write functions, these are provided by functions in the standard library.

Directives always begin with `#`, are one line long, and have no semicolon at the end.

### Functions

Building blocks for building programs.

Two categories: those written by the programmer and those provided with the C implementation, aka ***library*** functions.

C uses the term "function" more loosely than mathematical functions; in C it just refers to a series of statements that have been grouped together and given a name.

Only the `main` function is mandatory and gets called when the program is executed. `main` returns a status code that is given to the OS on program termination.

In `pun.c`:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    printf("To C or not to C; that is the question.\n");
    return 0;
}
```

The word `int` before `main` says that `main` will return an integer. `void` indicates `main` has no arguments.

`return 0` has two effects:

- Causes `main` to terminate
- Indicates `main` returns a value of 0, which indicates normal program termination

If there's no `return` statement, the program will still terminate but many compilers will issue a warning.

### Statements

`pun.c` uses two types:

- the `return` statement
- the ***function call***

Asking a function to perform its task is known as ***calling*** the function.

Statements have to end with a semicolon (with one exception, the compound statement). This shows the compiler where the statement ends which is especially useful when statements are written over several lines. As a reminder, directives are normally one line and don't end with a semicolon.

### Printing Strings

***string literal***: a series of characters in double quotes.

`printf` does not automatically advance a line after printing. We need to include the ***new-line character*** `\n` for it to do so. New-line characters can appear more than once in a string literal.

## 2.3 Comments

Here, the book asserts that every program should contain identifying information:

- program name
- date written
- author
- purpose of the program

and that this info should be placed in ***comments***. This is not necessarily bad advice but I think some of those pieces of info are more of a personal style choice and I happen to disagree about several of them:

- Name: there may have been good historical reasons to repeat the name of the program but VS Code clearly shows the file name at the top of the editor, so I don't see the point of repeating it in a comment block.
- Purpose: I think this does make sense to include; can think of it as equivalent to a purpose statement for a paper
- Author: Original author might be useful but for any code that gets shared and tracked with source control, a file might have multiple authors and there are better tools to check who is responsible for what logic than relying on the top comment. However, it is fun sometimes to go back in really old files and see who wrote it.

The book notes that the top of `pun.c` could look like this:

```c
/* Name: pun.c               */
/* Purpose: Prints a bad pun */
/* Author: K. N. King        */
```

I would propose it should look more like this, following my notes above as well as some of the answers in this [StackOverflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/846889/what-information-to-put-in-comments-at-the-top-of-a-sourcecode-file):

```c
/* Code for the book C Programming: A Modern Approach 2nd Ed
/* Copyright/License details
/* Purpose: Prints a bad pun. */
```

Comments may extend over more than one line. The compiler reads and ignores everything after `/*` until it encounters `*/`, even new-lines. The above comment could look like this:

```c
/* Name: pun.c
   Purpose: Prints a bad pun.
   Author: K. N. King */
```

This can be hard to read though because it can be easy to miss the closing `/*`. You can help with this by putting it on a separate line:

```c
/* Name: pun.c
   Purpose: Prints a bad pun.
   Author: K. N. King
*/
```

Some programmers might want to make a box around the comment to help it stand out:


```c
/*******************************
 *  Name: pun.c                *
 *  Purpose: Prints a bad pun. *
 *  Author: K. N. King         *
 *******************************/
```

You can simplify this by only "drawing" one side:

```c
/*
 * Name: pun.c
 * Purpose: Prints a bad pun.
 * Author: K. N. King
 */
```

Short comments can go on the same line with code:

```c
int main(void) /* Begin main program */
```

These are sometimes called "winged comments".

C99 provides the ability to comment using two forward slashes (`//`), and these comments automatically terminate at the end of a line. This eliminates the possibility of inadvertently commenting out part of your program if you forget the terminator, and multiline comments stand out better thanks to the `//` that's required at the start of each line.

## 2.4 Variables and Assignment

***Variables***: storage locations for temporary data used during program execution.

### Types

Each variable must have a ***type*** that specifies what kind of data it will hold. The book only introduces integer (`int`) and and floating point (`float`) number types at this point. `int`s store whole numbers, `float`s can store much larger numbers and numbers with digits after the decimal point.

### Declarations

Variables must be ***declared*** - described for the benefit of the compiler - before they can be used. First specify the type, then the name. For example:

```c
int height;
float profit;
```

Variables that have the same type can be declared all together:

```c
int height, length, width, volume;
float profit, loss;
```

In C89, declarations have to come before statements within a block; in C99, they do not. The programs in this book do not take advantage of this change for compatibility with older compilers.

## 2.5 Reading Input

## 2.6 Defining Names for Constants

## 2.7 Identifiers

## 2.8 Layout of a C Program
